Tutorial: how to bootstrap feature flags in React and Express (#5884)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/tutorials/bootstrap-feature-flags-react.md

---
title: How to bootstrap feature flags in React and Express
date: 2023-05-02
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
sidebar: Docs
featuredImage: ../images/tutorials/banners/tutorial-3.png
tags: ['feature flags']
---

> Bootstrapping feature flags make them available before React and PostHog load on the client side. This enables uses like routing to different pages before load, content being available on first load, and visual consistency. 

Reviewer: makes them available _as soon as_ PostHog loads, they can't exist without posthog 😬 .

```suggestion
Bootstrapping feature flags make them available as soon as React and PostHog load on the client side. This enables use cases like routing to different pages on load, all feature flagged content being available on first load, and visual consistency. 
```

> Already have an app set up? [Skip straight to the feature flag bootstrapping implementation](#handle-feature-flags-on-the-backend).

## Create a React app and add PostHog

Make sure you have [Node installed](https://nodejs.dev/en/learn/how-to-install-nodejs/), then create a new React app named `client`.

```bash
npx create-react-app client
```

Once created, go into the new `client` folder and install `posthog-js`.

```bash
cd client
npm i posthog-js
```

Next, get your PostHog project API key and instance address from the getting started flow or [your project settings](https://app.posthog.com/project/settings). Use them to set up a PostHog initialization in your `index.js` file.

```js
// src/index.js
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom/client';
import './index.css';
import App from './App';
import posthog from 'posthog-js'

posthog.init(
  '<ph_project_api_key>', 
  { 
    api_host: 'https://app.posthog.com' 
  }
);

const root = ReactDOM.createRoot(document.getElementById('root'));
root.render(
  <React.StrictMode>
    <App />
  </React.StrictMode>
);
```

### Create and setup a feature flag

> While we focus on PostHog, we can set up a feature flag to bootstrap later. This also gives us a chance to show why bootstrapping is valuable.

Author: 👍 I moved the second sentence later.

In the feature flag tab, create a new flag, set a key (I chose `test-flag`), set the rollout to 100% of users, and save it. Once done, you can check for your flag in the `loaded()` method on initialization like this:

```js
posthog.init(
  '<ph_project_api_key>', 
  { 
    api_host: '<ph_instance_address>',
    loaded(ph) {
      console.log(ph.isFeatureEnabled('test-flag'))
    }
  }
);
```

> This also gives us a chance to show why bootstrapping is valuable. On the first load of the site (before the flag is set in cookies), you see `false` in the console even though the flag should return `true`. This is because the flag isn’t loaded yet when you check it. This means the flag might not show the right code on the initial load for that user. Bootstrapping flags solves this.

Reviewer: great walkthrough!

1. the bundler and build the React app.
2. an Express server to get feature flag data from PostHog and serve the React app.

To start, install the package to compile, transform assets, and hot reload the server on file change.

```bash
npm install --save-dev @babel/register babel-plugin-transform-assets
npm install -g nodemon
```

After this, we make one more change to `index.js` to change `ReactDOM.createRoot` to `ReactDOM.hydrateRoot`.

```js
// src/index.js
//...
const root = ReactDOM.hydrateRoot(document.getElementById('root'));
root.render(
  <React.StrictMode>
    <App />
  </React.StrictMode>
);
```

Finally, build the client so we can serve it from the Express server.

```bash
npm run build
```

## Set up our server-rendering Express app

To start, in the client folder, create another folder named `server`. Inside this folder, create an `index.js` file. In this file, we:

1. Set up Babel.
2. Import the packages for React, Express, and the file system.
3. Set up an Express get handler for all routes that:
    1. Creates a React app from our built client code

>     2. Reads the index file from the built client code

Author: I think it does more than just compile. Compiling is one step in the build process AFAIK.

  ],
  plugins: [
    [
      'transform-assets',
      {
        extensions: ['css', 'svg'],
        name: 'static/media/[name].6ce24c58023cc2f8fd88fe9d219db6c6.[ext]',
      },
    ],
  ],
});

const React = require('react');
const ReactDOMServer = require('react-dom/server');
const App = require('../src/App').default;
const express = require('express');
const path = require('path');
const fs = require('fs');

const app = express();

app.get('/*', (req, res, next) => {
  if (req.url !== '/') {
    return next();
  }
  const reactApp = ReactDOMServer.renderToString(React.createElement(App));

  const indexFile = path.resolve('build/index.html');
  fs.readFile(indexFile, 'utf8', (err, data) => {
    if (err) {
      return res.status(500).send(err);
    }

    return res.send(
      data.replace('<div id="root">', `<div id="root">${reactApp}`)
    );
  });
});

app.use(express.static(path.resolve(__dirname, '../build')));

app.listen(8080, () =>
  console.log('Express server is running')
);
```

Once done, you can run the server with `nodemon server` and see your site in action (it looks the same).

```bash
nodemon server
```

## Handle feature flags on the backend

> To bootstrap the flags, first, we need the flag data from PostHog. To do this, we install `posthog-node`.

Reviewer: One slight problem here:

If the backend is going to our servers to fetch flags anyway, then bootstrapping isn't adding much since you're still waiting for flags to load.

In this case, you could easily just not show anything on your client-side react app until all flags are loaded (by leveraging posthog.onFeatureFlags() ) - and it would be a simpler alternative to server-side rendering + getting flags from a backend library.

What makes bootstrapping specially useful is when you don't have this delay - which you get by local evaluation in posthog-node!

So, I'd suggest adding this bit here, and then: 

(1) initialise posthog-node with a person API key, so local eval is enabled
(2) pass in person properties / group properties to `getAllFlags()` so all flags that are required can be computed without going to posthog's servers.
